RELAY PRACTICE WORKBOOK
=======================

These exercises extend your understanding; they are not claims that additional
features were implemented or extra experiments were already executed. Existing
tests use disposable stores. Keep crash flags and fault fixtures away from the
running demo's saved data. Use a separate copy or version-control branch for
code changes. Suggested times are estimates, not deadlines.

For each exercise, predict first, inspect code second, then gather evidence.
Write a short explanation of what the test proves and what it does not prove.


LAB 1: DRAW THE THREE IDENTITIES (30 MINUTES)
--------------------------------------------

An operator submits key K for workflow 3 with input "Sam". Run 42 is created.
Worker A claims it with token L1 and submits notification key "42:2". A crashes
after acceptance. Worker B claims the same run with token L2.

For each identity, write whether it must stay the same or change during:
  - Browser retry of the initial submission.
  - Worker restart and reclaim.
  - A genuinely new run of the same workflow/input.
  - A second notification step in the same run.

Answer guide: K stays on request retry; L changes on a new claim; the provider
key stays for retry of the same run/step but changes for another step or run.
A new run needs a new request key even with identical input. Matching input
does not automatically mean the operator intended the same execution.

Locate each identity's generation or validation in src/app.js, src/store.js
and src/worker.js. Explain why a lease token is a poor provider idempotency key.


LAB 2: PREDICT A PUBLISH-AND-RETRY TIMELINE (45 MINUTES)
------------------------------------------------------

Workflow W has publication 1. Request K creates run A but the response is lost.
The operator edits and publishes version 2, then resends K with the same input.
Another request J starts a fresh run with that same input.

Predict the identities and versions of the responses. Then find the run route's
ordering of existing-key lookup versus selecting the published version.

Answer guide: K returns A pinned to publication 1. J creates a different run
pinned to publication 2. Including "current latest publication" in the replay
intent check would accidentally turn K into a conflict or a new execution.
The stored run is the record of what the first accepted request selected.

Read the version-pinning test and identify its durable assertions. A heading
that says "v1" is insufficient if the worker actually reads mutable v2 steps.


LAB 3: CRASH AT THE DIFFICULT BOUNDARY (60-90 MINUTES)
----------------------------------------------------

Read the first crash case in tests/durability.test.js. Identify the two database
files, child process, crash flag, exit code and assertions before restarting.
Draw the exact line between accepted provider effect and saved app checkpoint.

Run the existing disposable suite:

  node --test tests/durability.test.js

Use the suite's temporary stores rather than setting CRASH_AFTER_EFFECT_ONCE
on the running app. The command also runs the other durability scenarios in
that file; read their names before interpreting the output.

Answer guide: before restart there is one prior transform checkpoint and one
provider receipt, while notify is not checkpointed. After recovery there are
two checkpoints, one receipt and a successful run on attempt 2. The prior
checkpoint retains its identity. Merely observing eventual success would
miss a duplicate notification.

Now remove provider deduplication only in a disposable experiment and predict
the failure before executing it. The expected lesson is that checkpoint fencing
alone cannot prevent a repeated external effect. Restore the implementation
after recording the counterexample; do not weaken the one-receipt assertion.


LAB 4: EXPIRE A LEASE WITHOUT KILLING THE OLD WRITER (45-60 MINUTES)
------------------------------------------------------------------

Read claimRun, renewLease and checkpointStep. Identify which predicates include
run state, current token and expiration. Design a deterministic sequence that
keeps A's token, gives ownership to B, then calls checkpointStep with A's token.

Answer guide: the old checkpoint is rejected and stored progress does not
change. Killing A and observing B recover does not test this condition, because
a dead A cannot submit its late result. Explicit supplied time allows tests to
represent the ordering without fragile real sleeps.

Explain why current time should be sampled after a write lock is acquired.
Then explain why token equality in this app database does not authorize the
database to erase an already accepted effect in the provider database.


LAB 5: EXPLAIN RETRY COUNTERS TO AN OPERATOR (45 MINUTES)
--------------------------------------------------------

Read failRun and the manual retry route. Create a fictional incident note:
"This run was claimed five times but exhausted a retry budget of three. Is
that necessarily a bug?"

Answer guide: not necessarily. Claims and recorded failures are different.
Crash recovery can increment total attempts without recording a transient
failure; manual retry resets the failure budget while retaining history.
Inspect the events and policy before concluding the counter is inconsistent.

Design an additional maximum-run-age policy on paper. Define whether waiting
time and operator-paused time count, what status is shown on exhaustion, and
whether manual retry extends the deadline. This policy is not implemented.

For a real provider, list examples of transient, permanent and uncertain
outcomes. A timeout after acceptance is uncertain even if a network library
labels the transport error retryable. The business consequence matters more
than the exception's class name.


LAB 6: PROTECT THE EDITOR'S UNSAVED WORK (45-60 MINUTES)
------------------------------------------------------

Read the browser scenarios for stale drafts, blank wait inputs and session
reconnection. For each, name the backend guarantee and the UI guarantee.

Answer guide:
  - Conflict: server refuses the old revision; UI retains the user's fields
    until an explicit reload/review action.
  - Blank wait: server rejects invalid duration; UI must not convert the blank
    into zero while reordering and accidentally submit a different valid value.
  - Session expiry: server rejects the old token; UI offers reconnection while
    retaining work and does not automatically repeat the failed mutation.

Sketch the sequence when an old polling request finishes after navigation to
a different run. Explain how page/request identity prevents its result from
owning the new view. Aborting the old request can be an optimization, but a
response guard still makes the ownership rule explicit.


LAB 7: DEFINE WHAT "WAIT TEN SECONDS" SHOULD MEAN (60 MINUTES)
-------------------------------------------------------------

The current wait calculates an in-memory deadline when execution reaches it.
If the worker crashes after eight seconds but before checkpointing, recovery
starts that uncompleted wait again. Predict the total elapsed delay in a case
with a short reclaim gap. It exceeds the original ten seconds.

Do not call that automatically wrong. It follows one policy: complete the
configured wait within an attempt before checkpointing. Another product may
require "continue no earlier than ten seconds after first entering this step."
That second policy needs a persisted deadline.

Design the extension: where is first-entry time saved, how does another claim
reuse it, what happens if the clock changes, and how does cancellation work?
Propose a deterministic test that restarts after partial elapsed time and
checks the remaining interval rather than sleeping through a long demo.

Answer direction: establish a durable step timing fact before waiting, keep
completed checkpoint semantics distinct from timing metadata, and have the
replacement use the recorded target. The source does not currently implement
that extension; it is an opportunity to practice a precise new contract.


CAPSTONE: ADD A REALISTIC LOCAL WEBHOOK ADAPTER (3-5 HOURS)
----------------------------------------------------------
Proposed extension; no real webhook step exists today.

Start with a local test receiver and a proposed webhook step. The receiver can
persist a request key and payload fingerprint, return an existing receipt,
accept then disconnect, or delay until the caller times out. Do not begin with
unrestricted internet URLs or live credentials.

Deliverables:
  - Payload, response and idempotency contracts for the receiver.
  - Timeout and cancellation policy, including accepted-but-unknown outcomes.
  - Versioned workflow schema and a migration story for existing definitions.
  - A bounded output/receipt model and redacted error reporting.
  - A failure matrix covering before acceptance, after acceptance, before
    checkpoint, changed payload under the same key and stale ownership.
  - An explicit design for destination restrictions and secret references
    before considering deployment beyond the isolated local receiver.

Answer direction: store and retry stable run/step intent across worker attempts.
Do not use an attempt token as the effect key. The receiver's durable behavior
is part of the guarantee. If you deliberately remove its deduplication support,
change the delivery promise and recovery UI instead of claiming the original
one-receipt guarantee still holds.


ADVERSARIAL REVIEW SESSION TEMPLATE
-----------------------------------

Builder brief: "State the feature's user outcome, persisted records, immutable
identities and failure boundaries. Implement one vertical slice. List what
is deliberately outside the scope."

Challenger brief: "Construct a concrete crash, stale-owner or duplicate-request
history that falsifies the guarantee. Separate app-database protection from
provider cooperation. Ask for an observable policy where the outcome is
ambiguous, not just another retry."

Verifier brief: "Use independent assertions and disposable stores. Inspect
both effect and checkpoint state. Explain why the chosen failure injection
hits the claimed window. Report uncertainty and timing flakiness explicitly."

Keep a resolution note with: initial promise; counterexample; alternatives;
chosen boundary; persisted facts; falsifying test; observed outcome; remaining
limits. A reviewer who agrees without a counterexample has not necessarily
challenged the design. A reviewer who asks for endless complexity has not
necessarily improved it either.

Score your explanation 0-2 on each dimension: version/identity clarity,
ownership correctness, effect-recovery semantics, appropriate independent
evidence, and honest scope. Ten points means you can explain the guarantee
and how it might fail. It does not mean the system has no remaining bugs.
